Democratic Rep. Chris Pappas will face Republican former Sen. John E. Sununu in the race for New Hampshire's open Senate seat, CNN's Decision Desk projects.
The battle for retiring Democratic Sen. Jeanne Shaheen's seat could prove critical to her party's hopes of flipping the chamber in November.
Tuesday's contests are setting several key midterm matchups that could test the status quo in New Hampshire, which has largely elected Republicans in the state government while sending Democrats to the US Senate and House of Representatives in recent years.
At the top of the ballot, voters also picked nominees for governor, with CNN projecting that Republicans will renominate Kelly Ayotte for another two-year term while healthcare lawyer Cinde Warmington ran unopposed for the Democratic nomination.
With Pappas vacating his battleground House seat, CNN projects that Democrat Stefany Shaheen, the daughter of New Hampshire's senior senator, will face Republican businessman Anthony DiLorenzo in November's general election for the 1st Congressional District.
Here are the key takeaways:
Key Senate matchup set
The Republican Senate race tested whether past criticism of President Donald Trump still carries a price in a GOP primary.
Sununu, who held the seat from 2003 to 2009 and belongs to the state's most established Republican family, defeated Scott Brown, the former Massachusetts senator and Trump ambassador who ran as an outsider vowing to break up a political dynasty.
While Sununu described Trump as a "loser" in an op-ed backing Nikki Haley's 2024 presidential campaign and said that he wouldn't have launched the war in Iran, he still managed to secure Trump's endorsement along with support from the national Republican establishment.
On the Democratic side, Pappas, a four-term congressman from a battleground House district, defeated Karishma Manzur, a democratic socialist who sought to score the latest upset for an ascendent anti-establishment left-wing.
Echoing Democratic primaries across the country this year that have wrestled with the issue of US support for Israel amid the devastation in Gaza, Pappas received criticism from his rival over his voting record in Congress and his relationship with the American Israel Public Affairs Committee.
But Pappas prevailed in the contentious race with a focus on affordability concerns, a vocal defense of safety-net programs, and a strong electoral track record, while also benefiting from about $4.8 million in outside spending, according to AdImpact data.
His victory could give Democrats a more clear-cut path to holding onto the seat in November than Manzur would have. But Sununu's strong name recognition and Senate record could prove troublesome for Pappas.
A Republican governor in Harris territory
Ayotte, a former US senator and state attorney general, is one of only two GOP governors seeking reelection this cycle in a state that former Vice President Kamala Harris won in 2024.
She campaigned on tougher public safety policies, drawing on her experience as a prosecutor, as well as expanding affordable housing and combating new taxes. She defeated two primary challengers.
In her time as governor, Ayotte has had an occasionally antagonistic relationship with New Hampshire's legislature, despite the body being controlled by her own party. In the last legislative session, Ayotte vetoed 33 bills. Lawmakers overturned seven of the vetoes, clashing with the governor over issues like criminal justice and education.
With Warmington running unopposed in her primary, Republicans turned their attention to the former New Hampshire executive councilor's campaign early and sought to tie her to the opioid crisis.
The Democrat previously worked for Purdue Pharma, which produced the highly addictive painkiller OxyContin, and in the early 2000s she fought against a state bill meant to make it more difficult to get a prescription for the drug. She has since said she was not aware of how dangerous the drug was at the time.
While Harris won the state in 2024, Republicans have held a trifecta in the state government for several years.
One Shaheen exits, another enters
When Sen. Jeanne Shaheen leaves the Senate early next year, her daughter could be headed to the House of Representatives at the same time.
Bolstered by support from local labor unions and New Hampshire's other senator, Democrat Maggie Hassan, Stefany Shaheen defeated a crowded field of primary rivals to secure the Democratic nomination.
In November, she'll face Republican Anthony DiLorenzo for the Manchester-based swing seat, which Pappas has represented since 2019.
But while she's likely benefited from name recognition in her bid for New Hampshire's 1st District, Stefany Shaheen has not been afraid to separate herself from the longtime senator and former New Hampshire governor.
A healthcare advocate and entrepreneur, the younger Shaheen focused her campaign on the issue and publicly broke with her mother when the senator last year voted in support of a deal to end the government shutdown without the extension of Affordable Care Act subsidies.
"Improving health care has been the cause of my life. It's why I am running for Congress. So I cannot support this deal when Speaker Johnson refuses to even allow a vote to extend health care tax credits," she said in a statement at the time.
DiLorenzo is a first-time candidate endorsed by Trump. He leaned heavily on his experience in the private sector as a real estate developer and auto dealer during the GOP primary, funneling more than $1.7 million of his own money into his campaign.
The longtime GOP donor was also bolstered by support from key members of Republican House leadership as they look to flip the 1st District and expand their razor-thin majority in the chamber.
This story has been updated with additional projections.