6 charged over prohibited processions, public assemblies
The processions include one along the Istana in support of the Palestinian cause, while one of the public assemblies was a mass kite-flying event at the Marina Barrage held in relation to the Gaza conflict.
SINGAPORE: Six people were charged on Wednesday (<DATE>) largely under the Public Order Act for taking part in various processions or public assemblies, or for organising them.
The processions include one along the Istana in support of the Palestinian cause, while one of the public assemblies was a mass kite-flying event at Marina Barrage held in relation to the Gaza conflict.
The six are: Kyal Sin Linn Naing, 22; Elijah Tay, 24; Amirah Mokhlis, 33; Dayana Noor Mohamed, 36; Nur Sabrina Kamel, 32; and Nurul Afiqah Kamel, 33.
THE CHARGES
Kyal, a Myanmar citizen and Singapore permanent resident, is accused of gathering with other people near Novena MRT station on <DATE> and moving together to the Ministry of Home Affairs to hand over letters opposing the Maintenance of Racial Harmony Bill.
Tay has nine charges, the most of the lot. The Singaporean shares the same charge with Kyal for the <DATE> public procession.
Tay is accused of attending candlelight vigils for the execution of inmates near Changi Prison on <DATE>, <DATE> and <DATE>.
On <DATE>, Tay allegedly refused to answer questions at Bedok Police Division regarding two of the candlelight vigils.
Tay is accused of committing an act prejudicial to the maintenance of racial harmony, which was likely to disturb "public tranquillity" on <DATE>.
This was by leading the chant "From the river to the sea, Palestine will be free" at The Arts & Civil Space in Ubi. This phrase supports the elimination of the Jewish state of Israel, the charge read.
Tay is also accused of taking part in an assembly at the State Courts on <DATE>, publicising the cause of abolishing capital punishment in Singapore. The courts are a prohibited area under the Public Order Act.
Tay is accused of refusing to answer questions at Police Cantonment Complex on <DATE>.
On <DATE>, Tay allegedly organised a public assembly by staging a memorial in front of the Campus for Research Excellence and Technological Enterprise at University Town within the National University of Singapore, demonstrating opposition to the ties between educational institutions in Singapore and Israel.
Amirah, a Singaporean, is accused of organising a public assembly on <DATE> at the Marina Barrage, to publicise the cause of honouring children who died in Gaza after October 7.
Dayana, a Singaporean who gave birth four months ago according to her lawyer, received two charges.
One is for taking part in the procession along the Istana publicising the cause of solidarity with Palestine on <DATE>, and the other is for organising the public assembly at the Marina Barrage.
Singaporean Nur Sabrina is accused of organising the public assembly at the Marina Barrage, and of making a vulgar gesture at a public servant at the same location.
Her sister, Nurul Afiqah, also Singaporean, is accused of taking part in the Istana procession and of organising the public assembly at the Marina Barrage.
Kyal is defended by Mr Derek Wong, while the rest are represented by Mr Ariffin Sha.
The lawyers asked for adjournments and for their clients not to have to appear in subsequent hearings unless otherwise needed. Both requests were granted.
The courtroom was packed, with many supporters in the public gallery and others waiting outside. Opposition politicians Dr Chee Soon Juan and Professor Paul Tambyah were also in attendance, along with activist Han Hui Hui.
Previously, three women who had organised the walk along the Istana had been acquitted by a district court but an appeal by the prosecution resulted in the acquittals being overturned. They were fined S$3,000 each.
If convicted under the Public Order Act of organising a prohibited procession, an offender can be jailed for up to six months or fined up to S$10,000, or both.
If convicted of taking part in a prohibited procession, an offender can be fined up to S$5,000.
If convicted of knowingly committing an act prejudicial to the maintenance of racial harmony, an offender can be jailed for up to three years or fined, or both.
The offence of using abusive behaviour towards a public servant is punishable with a fine of up to S$5,000.