The Israel Defense Forces captured Hamas' head of general security during a raid in Gaza, Israeli Defense Minister Israel Katz said.
An Israeli security official identified the Hamas leader as Mu'in al-Arabid, head of the General Security Apparatus, saying he was arrested during an Israeli incursion deep inside Hamas territory in Gaza. The IDF carried out airstrikes to cover the raid's withdrawal, adding that there were no Israeli casualties.
"A short time ago, a senior Hamas terrorist was arrested, and this is our policy: We do not wait for threats. Instead, we pursue Hamas terrorists, thwart them, and destroy their terrorist infrastructure. We have built a strong and unprecedented security zone in Gaza to protect residents and IDF soldiers," Katz said in a statement.
HAMAS STRUGGLES TO FILL LEADERSHIP RANKS AS ISRAEL HUNTS OCT 7 TERRORISTS
"Nearly 70% of the Gaza Strip has been destroyed, with no residents, no tunnels, and no homes, and the IDF controls the territory. We are not leaving Gaza until the Strip is demilitarized, Hamas is disarmed, and all terrorist tunnels are destroyed. Even after that, the IDF will remain in Gaza along defensive lines and ensure the security of the western Negev communities. Any attempt to bypass the security zone through aerial launches will be met with a harsh response," he added.
The raid comes weeks after President Donald Trump's administration demanded that Hamas disarm and give up control of Gaza in August. Jared Kushner, Trump's son-in-law, traveled to Israel last month and said the IDF may receive U.S. backing to "finish the job."
NETANYAHU REJECTS BOARD OF PEACE'S GAZA PLAN: NO 'WITHDRAWAL UNTIL HAMAS IS GENUINELY DISARMED'
"If they don't follow through now on their commitment, everyone will see that they're not genuine about peace, and then Israel will have a lot more support from the U.S. and others to go and finish the job in the appropriate way," Kushner also told Fox News' Trey Yingst of the terrorist group.
The warning from Trump's son-in-law followed a rare face-to-face meeting with Hamas in Egypt - only Kushner's second known meeting with the group.
KUSHNER TOUTS UNPRECEDENTED IRAN CONTACTS AS TEHRAN DENIES TRUMP BACKCHANNEL
"They said all the right things, but obviously, it's very, very hard to trust, you know, a terrorist organization that committed these terrible atrocities," Kushner continued. "But we had a very cordial meeting, and they said all the right things, and so we're going to give them a chance to perform."
"It's going to have to be based on actions and steps, and I hope it will be true."
The U.S.-led "Board of Peace" proposal centers on a phased ceasefire, demilitarization of Gaza, Israeli troop withdrawal, Palestinian technocratic governance and international reconstruction efforts.