Children's YouTuber star Ms. Rachel told Rolling Stone magazine on Tuesday that the backlash she received for her social media posts on Gaza "doesn't faze" her too much anymore.
The magazine reported that although Ms. Rachel, whose real name is Rachel Griffin Accurso, has spoken out on other political issues such as the Trump administration's deportation policies or LGBTQ activism, her comments on the Israel-Hamas war drew the most "aggressive criticism."
She remarked that the backlash surprised her initially.
"I thought everyone hated me at one point," Accurso said. "I remember calling friends and family members, Jewish and not Jewish, and just being like, 'Why do people hate that I don't want kids to be killed and starved?'"
YOUTUBE STAR MS RACHEL DECLARES 'I AM POLITICAL' IN NEW MISSION TO SHUT DOWN ICE FACILITY
Accurso continued advocating for Palestinian children in Gaza, calling out celebrities and politicians for not speaking out enough on their behalf.
"'You're gonna lose this partnership. You're gonna lose views.' That doesn't faze me because the kids gave me the platform. I'm going to stand with them no matter what," Accurso said. "People on the ground in Gaza are risking their lives all the time to help kids. I can do it from Manhattan."
Fox News Digital reached out to Accurso for comment but did not immediately receive a response.
CHILDREN'S YOUTUBE STAR 'MS. RACHEL' TALKS TO ANTI-ISRAEL REPORTER ABOUT GAZA POSTS
The article came days after Accurso accused celebrities who haven't spoken out about Gaza of having a racial double standard in how they value children.
"They probably would say something if these kids were White and from a different place. Please stop being racist and risk something," Accurso said on Instagram.
She was also one of several prominent progressives who called out singer Ed Sheeran following Macklemore's removal as the opening act for his tour after he repeatedly called for a "Free Palestine" and performed his anti-Israel song "Hind's Hall" during his act.
"Ed Sheeran had an opportunity [to] show that we won't be bullied into punishing people for supporting Palestine. Instead, he caved to people who refuse to accept what the world knows. A genocide is happening in Gaza. We all need to speak out against it," Accurso wrote.
"If more than 20,000 White children were killed in another part of the world, everyone would be shouting about it at their concerts," she added. "Treating some children's lives as less worthy of outrage is racist. Silence during a genocide is not neutral."
MS RACHEL CONFRONTED ON ACCUSING ISRAEL OF 'GENOCIDE' IN PARK INTERACTION WITH PODCASTER
Accurso has been criticized by pro-Israel organizations and groups that say her posts have shared anti-Israel propaganda by repeatedly accusing the Jewish nation of committing "genocide."
Rabbi Yaakov Menken, the executive vice president of the Coalition for Jewish Values, said in a statement to Fox News Digital, "To attempt to dress up Jew-hatred as a righteous cause is by no means new. No one is criticizing Rachel Accurso because she doesn't 'want kids to be killed and starved.'"
"She claims to care about 35.5 million children suffering from acute malnutrition across Africa, the Middle East, and Asia, but spends an inordinate amount of time speaking about 0.031 million children in Gaza," he added. "When 0.09% of starving children receive 90% of her attention, something is wrong."
"She had nothing to say about Israeli children being held hostage until seven months later, when the backlash became too loud to ignore. It is clear that her problem is not a deep concern for children, but that she is using her purported deep concern to mask something much darker," Menken concluded.