IDF reservist Neria Leiter, an American citizen and son of Ambassador to the US Yechiel Leiter, was seriously wounded in a car-ramming terrorist attack at Bell checkpoint on Route 443 on Wednesday.
In 2023, one of Leiter’s other sons, Maj. (res.) Moshe Yedidya, was killed in Gaza. He was a company commander in the 551st Brigade’s 697th Battalion.
Neria Leiter is currently in serious condition and is being treated at Shaare Zedek Medical Center in Jerusalem. In a Wednesday night statement, the hospital announced that Neria had undergone a multi-hour brain surgery, alongside other treatments, and that "his condition remains very serious, and his life is in danger."
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu visited Neria Leiter’s family at the hospital before leaving for the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA). At the same time, Yechiel Leiter is returning to Israel from the United States. He will not join Netanyahu at the UNGA on Thursday.
“I am grateful to the IDF, to the medical team at Shaare Zedek who are now fighting to save the life of Neria Dov ben Chana, and for the prayers of the people of Israel,” Leiter wrote on X/Twitter on Wednesday. “I believe in the power of prayer, and I believe that when the people of Israel unite, miracles happen. Neria needs a miracle."
“Neria continued to serve in the reserves after losing his older brother, Moshe Yedidya Leiter, of blessed memory. Since October 7, he has served hundreds of days in the reserves on multiple fronts.
“Palestinian terrorism seeks to uproot the people of Israel from their land. They choose death – we choose life,” Leiter said.
In a post on X, Netanyahu said he and his wife, Sara, “together with all the people of Israel, are praying for a miracle. Yechiel, my dear, we are all with you.”
US Ambassador to Israel Mike Huckabee said that he is standing with Leiter and his family.
"Pray for Yechiel Leiter & entire family. They lost a son in Gaza, killed by Hamas. Now a Palestinian terrorist attempts to murder IDF soldiers at a checkpoint. Standing w/ Yechiel Leiter," Huckabee wrote on X.
Yechiel, my dear friend, my heart is with you, Chana, and your entire family," Israel's Ambassador to the UN, Danny Danon, shared on X. "All of Israel is praying for your son, Neria Dov ben Chana, who was critically wounded in today’s heinous terrorist attack. May God heal him and give your family strength."
Defense Minister Israel Katz sent his support to Leiter’s family and prayers for Neria’s speedy recovery.
“Yechiel, I stand with you and your family, and I pray alongside the entire nation of Israel for your son’s recovery,” Katz said. “I commend the heroic fighters who eliminated the terrorist. To the soldiers of the IDF and the security forces: I believe in you and trust you; we will not allow terror to rear its head.”
"Yechiel, you are a warrior, and your sons are warriors," wrote Foreign Minister Gideon Sa'ar on X. "My heart and prayers are with you."
President Isaac Herzog also offered a "prayer for the complete and speedy recovery of Neria Leiter, a reservist soldier who was run over today in a heinous terror attack at the Maccabim checkpoint."
“Neria Leiter is the brother of Major Moshe Leiter, of blessed memory, a hero of Israel who fell at the beginning of the Swords of Iron War in Gaza," Herzog wrote in an evening statement. “We send our wishes for a complete recovery to Neria, and strength to his wife and to his parents, Hannah and Yechiel Leiter, Israel's Ambassador to the United States."
"Neria is fighting for his life at this very hour, and we will pray for his recovery. We all stand with this dear family and send them our strength.”
Police Commissioner Daniel Levi, National Security Minister Itamar Ben-Gvir, Finance Minister Bezalel Smotrich, Economy and Industry Minister Nir Barkat, and Ofir Akunis, Israel's consul general in New York, also offered Leiter their support.
“We join all the residents of Samaria in praying for the victim’s recovery and offer our support to his family during this difficult time,” Samaria Regional Council head Yossi Dagan said. “The Council will assist the victim’s family, and together with the community, we will embrace and support them in every way possible. The entire nation of Israel is united in prayer for his recovery.”
“We must respond to murderous terrorism with a firm hand and restore deterrence. We send our support to the security forces on the front lines who are protecting the citizens of Israel.”
IDF troops kill 29-year-old terrorist
The terrorist was killed by IDF troops who were at the scene as he attempted to flee. He has been identified as Muhammad Mahmoud Suleiman, 29, a resident of Beit Ur al-Tahta.
According to KAN News, Suleiman was very familiar with the area and carried out the attack on his own using a stolen Israeli license plate taken from a car that had been taken off the road several months ago.
He is not known for prior security-related offenses, had not applied for a work permit within Israel, and was not supposed to be inside the Green Line, KAN reported, citing security officials.
IDF and Shin Bet (Israel Security Agency) have reportedly questioned Suleiman's family members as part of the ongoing investigation into the attack.
Israel Police stated that the terrorist had hit a police patrol vehicle belonging to the Judea and Samaria District. An officer and a soldier were inside the vehicle as part of a joint operation.
“United Hatzalah’s dispatch center sent us to the scene of a vehicular ramming attack near Bell checkpoint,” United Hatzalah paramedics Itzik Kara and Netanel Cohen said. “Assisted by IDF medical teams, we provided initial medical treatment at the scene, including respiratory support, the administration of life-saving medication, bandaging, and splinting to a man who was subsequently transported to the hospital in serious condition.”
Palestinian shot after reported car-ramming attack attempt near Hebron
Earlier on Wednesday, two Palestinians reportedly attempted to run over the owner of a farm in the Hebron Hills.
The farm owner began shooting at them in accordance with the “suspect arrest procedure,” wounding one of the individuals in the leg, according to reports.
IDF troops were deployed to the area, N12 News reported, adding that the incident is under review.
Avi Ashkenazi contributed to this report.