On Friday, Jewish actor Adam Brody joined the growing list of progressive celebrities accusing Israel of committing "genocide" in Gaza while suggesting that Hollywood has grown more "conservative" under President Donald Trump.
Brody, who plays a rabbi in Netflix’s romantic comedy series "Nobody Wants This," addressed the topic when speaking to GQ Magazine about his political activism and volunteer work for the progressive organization Swing Left. Although he has not publicly addressed the Middle East conflict previously, Brody told the magazine that he has discussed it privately.
"Put me down as thinking it's a genocide," Brody said. "Put me down as wanting a free Palestine. It's awful that it's taken so much death and misery, but it does feel like it's reaching a breaking point that it should have a while ago. I'm hopeful that another administration can really do some good and correct some of these policies that are helping that situation be as awful as it is."
"The O.C." actor's comments resembled ones made by other progressive celebrities such as actor Mark Ruffalo and rapper Macklemore, who have referred to the Israel-Hamas conflict as a "genocide."
Though several celebrities have spoken out against Israel's actions, Brody suggested that political activism in Hollywood has decreased, noting that he doesn't speak about political issues in many interviews.
"I think it's the cycle. The first time Trump was elected, it was inconceivable. It woke everyone," he said. "There was so much activism. People were running for office that had never ran before. It was so awful to watch him defile our government, our country, our reputation, and really pit people against each other. I felt like most of the country right away was really against it."
"It felt very safe to step out against him in the first presidency," Brody continued. "The second time, the presidency was more powerful. Corporations were lining up behind him like they hadn't before. People had to risk more to get in front of it. It just felt like the mood wasn't there. The country decided this is the way it wants to go. As we start to pick up steam for this election, it's getting exciting again. We're starting to feel powerful again."
'SHE-HULK' STAR SLAMS TOM SELLECK, MICHAEL JORDAN AS 'COWARDLY' FOR AVOIDING POLITICAL TALK
Brody even claimed that Hollywood has gotten more "outspokenly" conservative during Trump's second term.
"Again, as one side has more power, it makes sense that it draws people to it for all the human reasons that would be attractive: groupthink, your own well-being, your own money and success," Brody said.
Fox News Digital reached out to Brody's representatives for comment but did not immediately receive a response.
In response to the interview, "Hollywood in Toto" founder Christian Toto told Fox News Digital that while it has gotten "microscopically better" to be a conservative in Hollywood, groupthink and bullying behind the scenes "remain powerful" as activism starts to see a resurgence.
MICHAEL RAPAPORT TELLS CRAIG CARTON THAT HIS SUPPORT FOR ISRAEL HAS COST HIM WORK IN HOLLYWOOD
CLICK HERE TO DOWNLOAD THE FOX NEWS APP
"Hollywood activism was a bit muted following the 2024 election, but now it's back to its usual volume and cadence. And if Brody truly felt afraid to say what he's saying ... he would keep it all to himself. Sharing his doctrinaire, hard-Left views is the most pro-career move an actor can make in 2026, particularly in how he's viewed by fellow actors," Toto said.